QSB Winter School 2015, ICTS

08 December, 2015

11.20 pm

Today was the first of the main school and a lot of new participants joined us
today. Mainly, few people from Indian Institute of Science and few from
different countries.

The session began with a brief introduction about ICTS and its activities by its
director. The main talks were taken by Prof. Gary Stormo, Matthew Scott and
Nathan Price. Since today was the first day of the series of lectures taken by
them, everyone focused on making introduction of the more technical material
they will be covering in the subsequent lectures.

Gary gave an overview of gene regulation using the excellent example of *lac*
operon in the bacterial cell. In the context, a lot of interesting things like
demand theory, network motifs, and list of interesting references came up.

Matthew wanted to talk about quantitative bacterial physiology. He began with an
overview or history of molecular biology and then took several examples as case
studies to explain how early researchers established critical properties of
complex systems using simple mathematical model. A message which he told was the
essential take home part of his lecture. Apart from this, I greatly enjoyed his
lecture. He spent all of his time writing and explaining concepts on the
blackboard -- which takes a significant amount of effort. Kudos!

Nathan Price talked about network reconstruction and gave an overview of general
steps and concepts involved in the process. There was a lot of content to be
covered (if details are considered) so he reserved most of them for the later
classes.

After the classes were over, we had a poster presentation session where everyone
put their works for critical evaluation and feedback by other people. It was
quite an informative session and inspiring to see people working so hard across
so many problems. Although tiring, I am happy that I learned a lot of things
from this experience. In the process, I met a couple of more undergraduates as
well, one of who presented an excellent poster and has been doing research since
second year itself.

Lastly, we had an announcement for the projects that we have to do in a group of
4-5 people, with no more than one person from the same university.
