QSB Winter School 2015, ICTS

09 December, 2015

8.30 pm

An important note before I write about today's set of events. I usually tend to
write these logs in a very private and personal manner by including a lot of
personal opinion about how I experienced different things. While this seems
natural, I feel that it might make it a bit difficult for someone else reading
the note to actually make out the set of concepts covered in class from others
(without having to read my reactions!). For this, I have decided to write about
the classes and lectures separated from my experiences but in the same notebook.
This note is the first implementation of this strategy.


--------
Speakers:

* Gary Stormo, Washington
* Matthew Scott, Waterloo
* Nathan Price, Institute of Systems Biology
* Kunihiko Kaneko, Tokyo University

Today was the second day of school and first three speakers continued with the
topics where they left yesterday. Gary Stormo focused on Protein-DNA
interactions today and how can they be modelled computationally. He is a pioneer
in the field and has early studies characterizing the binding sites in DNA using
computational methods. He discussed about PWM (position-weight matrix) and how
it can be used with the help of suitable data for DNA binding motif discovery.
In the later part, he also described experimental techniques like SELEX,
Spec-Seq, High throughput Micro Array to measure protein (transcription factors,
for example) affinity.

Ref: Protein-DNA Interactions, Gary Stormo (Book)

The second lecture was taken by Matthew Scott where he continued with his
description of case studies. He finished the work of Monod (1941) and went on to
describe the work of Schaecter et. al. (1958) and their experiments.

The third lecture by Nathan Price consisted of a descriptive talk on COBRA
(Constraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis). In the process, he discussed the
limitations of several algorithms and approaches. Towards the end, he talked
about methods of integrating regulation and metabolism (as an extension to the
only metabolic network earlier).

In the end, we had one of the first research talks by Prof. Kunihiko Kaneko, an
eminent researcher in complex systems biology at Tokyo University. He began with
some fundamental questions - Why life has to be so diverse? Is it possible to
predict the results or direction of evolution? Although, evolution is widely
studied qualitatively, his efforts were focused on numerical quantification of
simulated phenomenon and studying possible hypothesis for origin of
multi-cellularity and cell differentiation. An interested reader is advised to
refer to his collection of works (which are quite extensive).

Besides, all the speakers today listed an extensive resource of reference papers
and materials for excellent review of the content discussed today. I'll put them
in my `awesome-biology` collection.

-------------

Today was a pretty engaging day with back to back talks. We also spent a couple
of hours trying to form a group and subsequently discuss ideas for our combined
project due next week. Overall, it was a productive day with most of the time
spent in lectures and discussion. I got to know a few more people as well.
Looking forward to next day.
