QSB Winter School 2015, ICTS

12 December, 2015

(11.30pm + 2 hrs)


An usual intensive day of the school. The talks today continued from where Matt
Scott and Sukjoon Jun had left covered previously. However, Tzachi Pilpel from
Weizmann Institute of Science (Israel) joined us today as a new speaker.

## Tzachi Pilpel

(See notes)

The main idea of his talk was focused on exploring the 'economy' of translation
process. With a very brief recap of translation process, he went on to discuss
concepts like wobble base pairing, codon redundancy, codon bias, tRNAs and
related catalytic reactions. The idea was to understand how all of it fit
together to provide several layers of control to cell for 'finer' regulation.
The major part of the class focused on tRNA and how their abundance can be (and
*is*, as demonstrated later) is utilized by cell in 'smart' ways to regulate
translation, folding and perhaps minimize other costs.

For example, it is generally seen that starting regions of a protein or the
linker regions between two domains are encoded by tRNAs with low abundance (an
indicative of slow phase), perhaps to be more careful?

A plot of experimentally measured protein levels and predicted tRNA abundance
levels reveals an interesting correlation.

- tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI)

## Matt Scott

(Took 2 classes, one in evening)

Matt continued with his discussion of case studies and focused on the work of
Neidhart  (1961) and related concepts of bacterial cell growth physiology. The
question raised in the last class was that how do we reconcile the fact that
RNA/Protein vs. Growth rate is linear but translational speed (k) versus growth
rate is non-linear. While it may seem intuitive to begin with, the puzzling part
is that (RNA/Protein) and translation speed (k) are *linearly* related.

Turns out that using a michaelis-menten type kinetics for translational speed
(k) can help reconcile these facts together. Matt then discusses how to model it
in that form.

To save effort, I'll summarize that he explained in detail about
'proteome-partitioning' and how that can act as a growth regulator.

## Sukjoon Jun

(Ref: Helmstetter and Cooper, 1968)

Jun discussed about the elegant set of experiments performed by Helmstetter and
Cooper in 1960s to understand the bacterial cell cycle. How can one explain a 20
minute generation time of *E.coli* despite the fact that it takes 60 minutes to
synthesize content and divide (a time which is practically invariant of
conditions.) This led to the concept of multiple replication forks at a time and
how this idea can be understood from the model given by H&C.


-----

After the end of lectures, we had a formal presentation of the ideas all groups
were working on it. Although, I was in other group, I presented with Parth and
Prabhat for their group (glad that no one noticed! :P). The idea* and its
significance was well received. However, there were some genuine questions and
words of caution to avoid modelling in a way to fit our expected outcome, or
that the model doesn't become a tautology in itself. We seek to address these
concerns in coming days by discussion.


* Will discuss later.
